Title: Info

----

Text:

Whatstodo collects political positions by designers for designers. Sign the positions of others, articulate your own and become part of a collective catalogue. As a reference system, whatstodo facilitates critical reflection on your own practice, as a network it supports you in realising your goals.

About
Design cannot be apolitical. Every design practice is based on decisions that carry ideas and interests. A critical examination of the political dimensions of design and a positioning in terms of content is not uncommon among designers, but this is rarely communicated or put up for discussion, especially in everyday business.

The project whatstodo asks how this responsibility can be dealt with: What can we as designers contribute to issues such as equality, sustainability or digital change? For whom and with whom do we want to work? What images and ideas do we generate and communicate? What impact does our work have on society?

Whatstodo is a tool for political designers and those who want to become one. It is aimed at people who critically question their role as designers (in) society. At the heart of the project are the positions written by the participants, which contain political ideas and values as well as concrete possibilities for action. These can be signed and supplemented. The result is a collectively designed catalogue of positions that can be used to articulate personal priorities. The implementation, the stringency as well as the radicality of the goals and statements remain individually determinable.

Whatstodo also sees itself as a platform for collecting knowledge and networking. For designers as well as for clients, it offers the possibility to inform themselves about socio-political and design-political topics and positions. The provision of a reference system and the loose association with designers strengthen the participants' positions and facilitate transparent communication.

Whatstodo wants to inspire, give examples and simplify the conditions for critical reflection on one's own practice. The act of signing is central to the website and representative of the need for politically informed action. With this principle of self-commitment, whatstodo seeks to engage with political issues in design processes in a practice-oriented way and thus distinguishes itself from manifestos and absolutisms.

Self-conception
In addition to expressing and signing positions, the focus of whatstodo is on their implementation by the individual designers. Only through active action by the participants can conditions be changed and the actual goal of whatstodo - the politicisation and mobilisation of designers - be achieved. Signing a position does not replace political action, but encourages it.

Whatstodo is based on the idea of the Creative Commons: positions do not belong to individual authors, but are understood as common property. For us as initiators, it is important that knowledge is publicly available and that experiences are shared. In this way, access to information should be made possible for as many interested people as possible.

The project stands with all its strength for an open and democratic world that puts the equality of all people and fair dealings with each other first. Therefore, we explicitly point out that there is no tolerance towards racist and xenophobic, sexist and queerphobic, classist and ableist attitudes and statements. All forms of discrimination, marginalisation and hatred have no place on this platform. The aim of whatstodo is to create a comfortable environment to focus our attention together on social problems of our time.

Whatstodo is an open platform and does not claim to be exhaustive. Together with you, whatstodo seeks to further develop: the project and our working methods in order to realise the above-mentioned goals and values.

Background
Whatstodo was initiated by communication designer Béla Meiers as part of his diploma thesis at the Staatliche Hochschule für Gestaltung Karlsruhe. Based on the desire to integrate political interests more strongly into his design practice, he initially looked into the impact of design manifestos. Fascinated by the radicality of the political attitudes conveyed there, he noticed, however, that implementation often ends in compromise. Goals and ideas in daily practice are not realisable or only with great restrictions: too little budget for fair production conditions, k